Binary Signing
==============

Wiswa can generate PyInstaller workflow steps that sign Windows and macOS binaries so that users do
not see security warnings on launch. Signing is **optional** and controlled entirely by whether the
required GitHub secrets are present and non-empty.

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:

Overview
--------

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Platform
     - Warning without signing
     - Mitigation
   * - **Windows**
     - SmartScreen: "Windows protected your PC" / "Unknown publisher"
     - Authenticode code signing with a certificate from a trusted CA
   * - **macOS**
     - Gatekeeper: "unidentified developer" / "cannot be opened"
     - Code sign with a Developer ID Application certificate and notarise

Linux binaries are not signed in the same way; only Windows and macOS are covered here.

Windows: Authenticode Signing
-----------------------------

Obtain a Certificate
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. Buy an **OV (Organisation Validation)** or **EV (Extended Validation)** code-signing certificate
   from a public CA (e.g. DigiCert, Sectigo, SSL.com). EV certificates build SmartScreen reputation
   faster.

   For **testing or internal use**, create a self-signed code-signing certificate with ``makecert``,
   ``certreq``, or PowerShell. Users will still see a warning unless they install the root in their
   trust store.

2. Export the certificate (and private key) as a **PFX (.pfx / .p12)** file. Note the password.

3. *(Optional)* Choose an RFC 3161 timestamp server (e.g.
   ``http://timestamp.digicert.com``, ``http://timestamp.sectigo.com``) so signatures remain valid
   after the certificate expires.

GitHub Secrets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Add these as **repository** or **organisation** secrets:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Secret name
     - Description
   * - ``WINDOWS_SIGNING_CERTIFICATE``
     - Base64-encoded PFX file (e.g. output of ``base64 -w0 cert.pfx``)
   * - ``WINDOWS_SIGNING_PASSWORD``
     - Password for the PFX

Optional:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Secret name
     - Description
   * - ``WINDOWS_TIMESTAMP_URL``
     - RFC 3161 timestamp server URL

The generated workflow step will only run when ``WINDOWS_SIGNING_CERTIFICATE`` is non-empty. If the
secret is absent, Windows binaries are built unsigned (the current default behaviour).

macOS: Code Signing and Notarisation
-------------------------------------

Prerequisites
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

1. **Enrol in the Apple Developer Program.**

2. **Create a Developer ID Application certificate** in Certificates, Identifiers & Profiles.
   Download and install it in Keychain Access, then export as a **.p12** file with a password.

3. **Create an app-specific password** in your Apple ID account under Sign-In and Security →
   App-Specific Passwords.

4. **Note your Team ID** from the Apple Developer membership page or Xcode.

5. **Note the signing identity** string, typically
   ``Developer ID Application: Your Name (TEAM_ID)``.

GitHub Secrets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Add these as **repository** or **organisation** secrets:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Secret name
     - Description
   * - ``APPLE_SIGNING_CERTIFICATE``
     - Base64-encoded .p12 file
   * - ``APPLE_SIGNING_PASSWORD``
     - Password for the .p12
   * - ``APPLE_SIGNING_IDENTITY``
     - Full code-signing identity string
   * - ``APPLE_ID``
     - Apple ID email used for notarisation
   * - ``APPLE_APP_SPECIFIC_PASSWORD``
     - App-specific password for that Apple ID
   * - ``APPLE_TEAM_ID``
     - Team ID (10-character string)

The generated workflow steps will only run when ``APPLE_SIGNING_CERTIFICATE`` is non-empty. If the
secret is absent, macOS binaries are built unsigned.

Customising Secret Names
-------------------------

By default Wiswa uses the secret names listed above. If your repository or organisation uses
different names, override them in ``.wiswa.jsonnet`` under the ``github.secret_vars`` key:

.. code-block:: jsonnet

   {
     github+: {
       secret_vars+: {
         windows+: {
           signing_certificate: 'MY_WIN_CERT',
           signing_password: 'MY_WIN_PASS',
           timestamp_url: 'MY_WIN_TS_URL',
         },
         apple+: {
           signing_certificate: 'MY_APPLE_CERT',
           signing_password: 'MY_APPLE_PASS',
           signing_identity: 'MY_APPLE_IDENTITY',
           apple_id: 'MY_APPLE_ID',
           app_specific_password: 'MY_APPLE_APP_PASS',
           team_id: 'MY_APPLE_TEAM',
         },
       },
     },
   }

How It Works
------------

When the PyInstaller workflow is generated by Wiswa and the corresponding secrets are set:

**Windows**

1. The base64-encoded PFX is decoded to a temporary file.
2. Each ``.exe`` in ``dist/`` is signed with ``signtool``.
3. If a timestamp URL secret is set, the signature is timestamped.
4. The temporary PFX file is removed.

**macOS**

1. The base64-encoded .p12 is imported into a temporary keychain.
2. Each binary in ``dist/`` is signed with ``codesign --options runtime`` (Hardened Runtime).
3. The signed binaries are submitted to Apple's notary service with ``xcrun notarytool``.
4. The notary ticket is stapled to each binary with ``xcrun stapler``.
5. The temporary keychain and certificate file are cleaned up.

References
----------

- `SignTool <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/seccrypto/signtool>`_
- `Authenticode <https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/seccrypto/authenticode-signing>`_
- `Apple Code Signing Guide <https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/Security/Conceptual/CodeSigningGuide/Introduction/Introduction.html>`_
- `Notarizing macOS Software <https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/notarizing_macos_software_before_distribution>`_
- `notarytool <https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/notarizing_macos_software_before_distribution/customizing_the_notarization_workflow>`_
